
From: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/text/asteroids.txt
Date: 2015-MAR-14

Asteroids 

     Asteroids are metallic, rocky bodies without 
atmospheres that orbit the Sun but are too small to be 
classified as planets. Known as "minor planets," tens of 
thousands of asteroids congregate in the so-called main 
asteroid belt: a vast, doughnut-shaped ring located between 
the orbits of Mars and Jupiter from approximately 2 to 4 AU 
(186 million to 370 million miles/300 million to 600 million 
kilometers). Gaspra and Ida are main belt asteroids.

     Asteroids are thought to be primordial material 
prevented by Jupiter's strong gravity from accreting into a 
planet-sized body when the solar system was born 4.6 billion 
years ago. It is estimated that the total mass of all 
asteroids would comprise a body approximately 930 miles 
(1,500 kilometers) in diameter -- less than half the size of 
the Moon.

     Known asteroids range in size from the largest -- 
Ceres, the first discovered asteroid in 1801 -- at about 600 
miles (1,000 kilometers) in diameter down to the size of 
pebbles. Sixteen asteroids have diameters of 150 miles (240 
kilometers) or greater. The majority of main belt asteroids 
follow slightly elliptical, stable orbits, revolving in the 
same direction as the Earth and taking from three to six 
years to complete a full circuit of the Sun.

     Our understanding of asteroids has been derived from 
three main sources: Earth-based remote sensing, data from 
the Galileo flybys, and laboratory analysis of meteorites. 
Asteroids are classified into different types according to 
their albedo, composition derived from spectral features in 
their reflected sunlight, and inferred similarities to known 
meteorite types. Albedo refers to an object's measure of 
reflectivity, or intrinsic brightness. A white, perfectly 
reflecting surface has an albedo of 1.0; a black, perfectly 
absorbing surface has an albedo of 0.0.


     The majority of asteroids fall into the following three 
categories:

     C-type (carbonaceous):  Includes more than 75 percent 
of known asteroids. Very dark with an albedo of 0.03-0.09. 
Composition is thought to be similar to the Sun, depleted in 
hydrogen, helium, and other volatiles. C-type asteroids 
inhabit the main belt's outer regions.

     · S-type (silicaceous):  Accounts for about 17 percent 
of known asteroids. Relatively bright with an albedo of 
0.10-0.22. Composition is metallic iron mixed with iron- and 
magnesium-silicates. S-type asteroids dominate the inner 
asteroid belt.

     · M-type (metallic):  Includes many of the rest of the 
known asteroids. Relatively bright with an albedo of 0.10-
0.18. Composition is apparently dominated by metallic iron. 
M-type asteroids inhabit the main belt's middle region.

     The relationship between asteroids and meteorites 
remains a puzzle. The most common meteorites, known as 
ordinary chondrites, are composed of small grains of rock 
and appear to be relatively unchanged since the solar system 
formed. Stony-iron meteorites, on the other hand, appear to 
be remnants of larger bodies that were once melted so that 
the heavier metals and lighter rocks separated into 
different layers.

     A long-standing scientific debate exists over whether 
the most common asteroids -- the S-types -- are the source 
of ordinary chondrites. Spectral evidence so far suggests 
that the S-type asteroids may be geochemically processed 
bodies akin to the stony-irons. If S-types are unrelated to 
ordinary chondrites, then another parent source must be 
found. If the two are related, then scientists need an 
explanation for why they aren't spectrally similar.

     Asteroids with orbits that bring them within 1.3 AU 
(121 million miles/195 million kilometers) of the Sun are 
known as Earth-approaching or near-Earth asteroids (NEAs). 
It is believed that most NEAs are fragments jarred from the 
main belt by a combination of asteroid collisions and the 
gravitational influence of Jupiter. Some NEAs may be the 
nuclei of dead, short-period comets. The NEA population 
appears to be representative of most or all asteroid types 
found in the main belt.

     NEAs are grouped into three categories, named for 
famous members of each: 1221 Amor, 1862 Apollo, and 2062 
Aten.

     Amors:  Asteroids which cross Mars' orbit but do not 
quite reach the orbit of Earth. Eros -- target of the NEAR 
mission -- is a typical Amor.
     Apollos:  Asteroids which cross Earth's orbit with a 
period greater than 1 year.  Geographos represents the 
Apollos.
     Atens:  Asteroids which cross Earth's orbit with a 
period less than 1 year. Ra-Shalom is a typical Aten.

     NEAs are a dynamically young population whose orbits 
evolve on 100-million-year time scales because of collisions 
and gravitational interactions with the Sun and the 
terrestrial planets. Approximately 250 NEAs have been found 
to date, probably only a few percent of their total 
population. The largest presently known is 1036 Ganymed, 
with an approximate diameter of 25.5 miles (41 kilometers). 
Estimates suggest at least a thousand NEAs may be large 
enough -- 0.6 mile (1 kilometer) or more in diameter -- to 
threaten Earth. 

     Many bodies have struck Earth and the Moon in the past, 
and one widely accepted theory blames the impact 65 million 
years ago of an asteroid or comet at least 6 miles (10 
kilometers) in diameter for mass extinctions among many 
lifeforms, including the dinosaurs. Other theories suggest 
that the chemical building blocks of life and much of 
Earth's water arrived on asteroids or comets that bombarded 
the planet in its youth.

     On June 30, 1908, a small asteroid 330 feet (100 
meters) in diameter exploded over the remote region of 
Tunguska in Siberia, devastating more than half a million 
acres of forest. One of the most recent close calls occurred 
on March 23, 1989, when an asteroid 0.25-mile (0.4-
kilometer) wide came within 400,000 miles (640,000 
kilometers) of Earth. Surprised scientists estimated that 
Earth and the asteroid -- weighing 50 million tons and 
traveling at 46,000 miles/hour (74,000 kilometers/hour) -- 
had passed the same point in space just six hours apart.
